=========================
MongoDB CRUD Introduction
=========================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 1
   :class: singlecol

MongoDB stores data in the form of *documents*, which are JSON-like
field and value pairs. Documents are analogous to structures in
programming languages that associate keys with values (e.g.
dictionaries, hashes, maps, and associative arrays). Formally, MongoDB
documents are :term:`BSON` documents. BSON is a binary representation
of :term:`JSON` with additional type information. In the documents, the
value of a field can be any of the BSON data types, including other
documents, arrays, and arrays of documents. For more information, see
:doc:`/core/document`.

.. include:: /images/crud-annotated-document.rst

MongoDB stores all documents in :term:`collections <collection>`. A
collection is a group of related documents that have a set of shared
common indexes. Collections are analogous to a table in relational
databases.

.. include:: /images/crud-annotated-collection.rst

Database Operations
-------------------

Query
~~~~~

In MongoDB a query targets a specific collection of documents. Queries
specify criteria, or conditions, that identify the documents that
MongoDB returns to the clients. A query may include a *projection* that
specifies the fields from the matching documents to return. You can
optionally modify queries to impose limits, skips, and sort orders.

In the following diagram, the query process specifies a query criteria
and a sort modifier:

.. include:: /images/crud-query-stages.rst

See :doc:`/core/read-operations-introduction` for more information.

Data Modification
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Data modification refers to operations that create, update, or delete
data. In MongoDB, these operations modify the data of a single
:term:`collection`. For the update and delete operations, you can
specify the criteria to select the documents to update or remove.

In the following diagram, the insert operation adds a new document to
the ``users`` collection.

.. include:: /images/crud-insert-stages.rst

See :doc:`/core/write-operations-introduction` for more
information.
